---
layout: post
title: Generative AI
subtitle: What is GenAI and what's behind it?
gh-repo: seyong2
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [Artificial Intelligence, Generative AI, Machine Learning, Deep Learning, Data Science]
comments: true
---

- What is Generative AI?
  - Generative: create new content (image, code, video, audio, text, etc.)
  - Artificial Intelligence: a computer program that does tasks for our humans.
 
- Generative AI is not something new... In fact, single-purpose systems like Google Translate, iPhone Siri, autocompletion, etc. have been around for quite some time. And in 2023, OpenAI launched ChatGPT which is capable of generating different kinds of content based on our needs. Then, how did we get from single-purpose systems to ChatGPT? What's the core technology behind ChatGPT? What's the future going to look like?

  - There are other models (variants) like ChatGPT out there but the principle they use in common is language modeling. What it does is that given the sequence of words provided (context), it predicts what the next might look like using a neural network to see the word that is most likely to come next.
  - How can we create a language model? For the first step, we need to collect a very large corpus, e.g., Wikipedia, StackOverflow, Quora, Github, Reddit, etc. The next step is to ask the model to predict the next word in a sentence. If you ask how, it is quite simple. We'd randomly truncate the last part of the input sentence and the model would choose output based on likelihood. We then adjust and give feedback to the model until it produces the output that matches the ground truth. Finally, we'd repeat the whole process over the whole corpus that we've collected. The transformer is the one that is used for ChatGPT.
  - Transfer learning: Once we have a pre-trained model (general purpose model), we need to specialize it somehow so that it can do some specific tasks. It means that we have to fine-tune the initialized weights from the pre-trained model and we'll have to narrow a new set of weights for specific tasks.
  - The bigger the model is, the better the work it does and the more tasks it can do. The GPT-4 has one trillion parameters.
  - The ChatGPT has fine-tuned the model based on the prompts that the users have been asking for the model so that the model can generalize to unseen tasks.
